Anna Lena, welcome back to Talk Python To Me. It's awesome to have you here.
Yeah, thanks for having me again.
Yeah, it's always fun to have you on. You've got interesting and playful topics. I think the very
first time that you were on the show, I can't remember how many years ago, but it's been a
little while, was to talk about learning Python through Harry Potter. Is that right? In the
Magical universe.
Yeah, I still love that project a lot.
Yeah, people can find that on GitHub,
and they obviously can find that episode on talkpython.fm.
But we're back for, I would say,
another playful episode in a sense, right?
Continuing the theme.
I'm going to talk about when should you teach kids to program,
and maybe even more importantly,
what are some age-appropriate resources
that spans a good chunk of what a kid's life is.
Like, is a kid not a kid at 18?
I don't know.
But lower than that, a lot of resources.
Exactly.
Yeah, so that's going to be a lot of fun.
It has been a while since you've been on the show, though.
So just a quick introduction about who you are and what you do for everyone listening.
Yeah, actually, not much has changed since the last episode.
I think that was on Python packaging.
I'm still a senior machine learning engineer at a German company called InnoVex, where I jump from project to project.
I'm currently working at the speech recognition team at Bubble still.
Was that last time as well?
I think so. I believe so.
Yes. So, yeah, I'm still there in the project. I love it.
It's a very interesting topic.
And, yeah, I love Python.
We have talked about different topics over the years, and this time it's on children.
And yeah, a talk I prepared for PyData and the PyCon here in Germany.
And it was lots of fun to learn about it.
Yeah.
It looks like you did a lot of research to go into this.
And I think it's probably worth pointing out that we both are parents.
And so we have some interest in this topic, you know, close to home as well.
My kids are getting a little bit older for any of this kind of guidance, but still, a
lot of things I thought about as they were growing up and some of these things we're
going to talk about I've actually used before I saw them on your list as well, which is
cool.
But yeah, it's a personal topic, I suppose.
Yeah, absolutely.
For me, it's also personal because I did not have any coding opportunities growing up myself.
And I really want this to be different for children growing up now and my own kids.
So that's also a reason why I wanted to do the research.
So that would be just different.
Let me know what you think.
But I feel like there are social stigmas.
Like this person should be a coder and that person shouldn't be a coder.
They should go do something else.
And that may or may not be around gender, but often it is, unfortunately.
But when you're six years old, you don't care.
You like games, you want to play a game, you want to explore, things are interesting, right?
So I feel like this kind of stuff also has a big opportunity to short circuit these unnecessary influences, I guess, depending on different cultures.
And also just having it in your environment.
If there's like a person in your family or your friend circle or even at school and you have some opportunity to learn about it, it helps a lot.
For me, it just wasn't a topic ever.
And I still remember my parents when I told them that I was switched to computer science in my graduate degree.
They were like, are you sure you want to do that?
Isn't that like very nerdy, techy stuff?
And I'm so happy I did the switch, even though it was quite hard in the beginning.
But it's an amazing topic and there's so much cool stuff to do.
It's just not only the nerdy stuff.
It's always got something new.
That's both the benefit and the curse of it.
What you've learned is powerful and helpful, but there's more to learn.
Yeah, always.
But that makes, like, keeps it interesting, right?
You never get bored.
Exactly.
Especially when you're in JavaScript.
Okay.
So I feel like as your parents had that thought, you know, probably one thing they may have
thought, I don't know, obviously I don't know them, but a lot of people would think is that's
a very antisocial sort of thing, right?
Like, oh, you're going into programming.
That means you're going to sit behind a computer screen completely alone and not talk to people.
And I think that's one of the misconceptions of programming.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
Like, even now, when I'm working remotely most of the time, I have so many meetings and collaborations with other developers.
And I don't ever feel not part of my team, even if I don't see them.
Because we interact so much.
Sometimes they sit on a completely different continent and it still feels very close.
And we do laugh and we don't only pair code, but we like, yeah, you get to know them well.
And it's lots of fun, interesting people that are not the stereotype of coders.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
I bring that up because I think some people listening might be attracted to the show who don't necessarily work as programmers themselves, you know?
I can recommend it a lot.
I think it's a lot of fun.
Absolutely.
All right.
Well, we talked about some of the reasons that we're interested in this, obviously.
But why?
I mean, as people who like programming, we may want to communicate or share that thing we like with other kids, with our kids, and so on.
But I think programming also can stand in for a lot of more traditional things, such as like geometry and so on.
Yeah, for me, I think what I like most about it is that you can really make things.
You can see them come alive and it can be a game.
It can be something more math related.
It can be music, websites.
You can just create anything that you're interested in and even have so much fun seeing it come to life.
So it's not just learning a skill, maybe for a job or your life at home or your hobbies,
but it's more of being able to create anything that you're interested in.
And then, of course, you have the obvious advantages like the career opportunities
and lots of skills that are taught by learning how to code
that you do not think about in the beginning, I guess.
Yeah, absolutely.
The realism or I've created something I can see,
even though it's still digital and virtual
and you can't actually touch it usually,
unless it's like robotic or something.
But that's so much more realistic and interactive
than things like, oh, you're going to learn these axioms.
and then we're going to teach you how to, you know, prove stuff about angles and triangles
with these axioms. It's going to teach you logical thinking. So, you know, sit down for the year and
we're going to talk about small angles, big angles, you know, diagonal, cross-connected,
all that kind of stuff, right? Which is a little bit useful, but being able to work with computers
is way more. And I think it teaches these problem solving and computational thinking skills
at least as well.
Yeah, absolutely.
Especially what you said,
like problem solving, logical thinking,
that kids, like not only adults,
but kids especially,
they understand that you might have
a complex problem you want to solve,
but you can break it down into simpler steps,
like what an algorithm is actually doing,
giving you a step-by-step path to reaching a goal.
And you can teach that not only by coding,
also, of course, by just playing
and seeing you want to build this huge lego piece but you start building it with little pieces and
put it all together and that's also what you have in coding you want to reach a goal you want to
program a game or maybe create an animation and you understand how to break it down
and um yeah it helps us or also kids to make more structured decisions um yeah i think that's a
a very valuable skill to learn, not only for coding, but for everyday life, I guess.
Yeah.
Being able to break problems down and solve them.
That's like adulthood right there.
Yeah.
What I also find really helpful is one of the skills I looked at specifically is perseverance.
Also for kids, they get frustrated so easily and give up and say like, this is not working.
I don't like this.
I hate this and start throwing their toys around.
At least we are at this stage.
Your kids are probably not doing that anymore.
But yeah, I think with coding, when you encourage them to keep going,
even or especially when they fail, that they understand that failure isn't something bad,
but rather it keeps you improving, it keeps you going,
and that you can learn to see challenges or problems at something positive
and something you can grow with.
I think that's really, really great about coding because you will have that a lot when you learn how to code.
Yeah, absolutely. I absolutely agree with you.
In the problem, this perseverance skill is incredibly important.
I agree.
It manifests itself a little bit differently as they get older.
Instead of going, I dislike this, you know, like this toy is crap.
I can't make it do its thing or whatever.
It's more, I can't do this.
I'm not good at this.
and a really important skill i think is not i can't do this like i need to work at being good
at this and that perseverance that you learn honestly i think one of the very most important
skills that people can have as a programmer or in software development in general is perseverance
like doesn't work i read the docs still doesn't work i read stack overflow people were mean
Still didn't help me, but eventually, you know, I worked my way and now it works.
And it's such a cool feeling to work through those things.
But until you learn the perseverance, you just think, well, I wasn't good at math.
I must not be good at programming.
I'm out.
Yeah.
I think that keeps a lot of children to learn or to like learning things that are hard.
I know that lots of kids struggle with math and, yeah, like STEM classes.
But I think it's often because they feel like I don't understand this.
It might also not be explained in the best way, but they just shut down and say, OK, I'm just not going to try.
And if you understand and maybe also I know that there's this huge psychological research on growth mindset that you understand that you shouldn't praise just an outcome, but rather the effort that kids try to do something.
they try to improve and put in the work that that's just so much more important than reaching
the goal in the end. And yeah, we can really help our kids to become more robust and more joyful
about learning by teaching these principles, for example, through learning how to code.
Yeah, absolutely. Now, you did give this as this topic as a talk at PyData. Was that PyData Berlin?
was it and i gave it once at pi data london and at pi con berlin and at europe okay yeah so uh the
reason i was gonna bring that up is you had some really cool pictures yeah i know you'd come up
with and like a little persistent kid working away there and stuff like that right oh i love them i
I love creating them.
I used Deli 3 to create them.
And I spent so much time just playing around with the model
and providing it prompts to see which images I liked best.
Of course, there were the obvious problems with some of them
that the kids had six fingers and so on.
But still, it was amazing to create these images.
And I love the Perseverance one.
And we can link the article to my blog later
where you can see the image.
It's just everyone laughs when they see the picture.
Yeah, the pictures are great.
The pictures are great.
All right, let's talk for a minute about brain development and maybe the different stages
that kids go through because there's kind of four or five stages, which then you might
map over to the different types of resources that we're going to talk about.
Yeah, I think that's a really important topic to consider.
If you want to understand when your child is able to do certain things, then you need to be able to understand how their brain develops because our brain matures over time.
It's not fully mature at birth, but quite the opposite.
And some regions of the brain take more time to develop and some like vision and hearing are quite well developed already at birth.
So at certain ages, it doesn't make sense to start coding.
for example, from zero to four, there is not much there for them to really have the cognitive
abilities to understand computational principles or really sit down and concentrate and focus.
So yeah, for example, at birth, you have quite a lot of neurons already, but just 25% of the
adult size brain. And when you reach the age of four, you already have 80%. So it has grown a lot
through the first four years.
And you do have a lot of influence as a parent or caregiver, friend, whatever.
But yeah, mostly the primitive areas of the brain develop first,
like hearing, vision, emotional regulation starts developing,
but really cognitive and executive functions like planning and so on come later.
So I guess zero to four years would be, or birth would be the first stage.
And then zero to four years where you have lots of things happening and you can influence that by positive influences from like responsive caregiving, that you have diverse learning experiences and playing with a child.
And then at four years, it starts getting interesting.
And that's also where you can start doing things with your kid.
But like, do you want to rather talk about the development first and then about-
Maybe we should talk about the resources that go with each stage.
What do you think?
Yeah.
Yeah, let's do that.
I think that's a good idea.
Yeah, I do too.
Since we already reached age four now.
Oh yeah, nice.
Yeah, so at age four, you can teach basic algorithmic thinking, which you can ask questions
like, what would you do to guide a lost puppy home?
just making them start to think about how to break down problems into smaller steps.
But also, they have the motor skills at that age and the perceptual abilities to interact
with simple toys that teach the basics of coding.
And you open the BeeBot, which is a tiny floor robot, or I guess it's not so tiny.
It's a bee, and it has four directions to go, front, back, right, left.
And then you can, I think it can remember up to 130 commands.
And you can press go.
And yeah, program the way it's supposed to crawl or walk.
However you want to phrase it.
Yeah, so one thing you might do with this thing is,
so this is a little robot that has wheels.
Looks like it'd be, you can, what you do is you push the buttons like
forward, forward, right, forward, left, forward, forward.
And you might put out something on the ground, like a little,
Like, can you make your bee go around this thing and then through this little gate or whatever, right?
Those kinds of challenges.
I think even when you purchase them, you can purchase rucks that have certain paths on them and so on.
I guess it's a very, you can spend a lot of money on these kinds of toys.
But maybe as a side note, if you start looking, you will find tons of robots in different price ranges.
So I guess we will only mention examples.
But if you start looking, you will definitely find lots of different options.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Would you say that this RoboTurtles game falls into the same category?
Or is that a little bit older?
Oh, I'm not sure from the top of my head if it's Ola.
What I like about it is that it's a board game.
So I'm always asked about screen-free offers.
So something that you can play without sitting in front of the laptop
because screen time is just a general huge discussion point.
But I would have to...
So if I...
Yeah, looking at the box here, it says ages four and up.
So probably.
Oh, nice.
That's really cool.
Yeah.
Yeah, so this one is, I think it's almost exactly the same problem. There's a little bit more to it, because there's a couple of challenges in the board game. So I think we actually have this board game from when my daughter was young. And you have a little turtle, which is a card and a board and you can put stuff on the board like little rocks, it's it can't go through. Maybe there's like an ice wall, and it has ability to like, melt the ice, but it has to do that before it can move forward, you know, so you, you get a bunch of cards,
and you put them in a stack and then you like play them out to see if your turtle wins the game or something like that.
So this is another pretty good option at that age, especially if you want something not electronic.
Yeah. What I also like about it is that it becomes a family activity that you learn.
That's just in general a very good thing if you want to teach your kids how to code,
that you make learning a fun activity and playing games, being with them, showing interest,
and having fun doing it as part of gaming
or what you do at home, playing board games.
That's just a very easy way then to get started
and to get them interesting.
I should point out like the actual Robot Turtles website
has a bad SSL certificate right now.
So I'm sure you can find it on like Amazon
and other places, but it's, yeah, anyway.
Okay, so what else?
Another one you talked about is kubelets,
but this feels like this might be a little bit older.
Yeah, kubelets, well, you can start early with them,
but you can also use them at a later stage
because you can program them using visual coding languages,
or one of them may code, but you can start quite early.
So yeah, kubelets are small physical blocks,
as you can see there, that you just plug together and some of them move,
some have cameras or sensors, and you can build lots of cool, unique robots with them.
And if you start looking at demos on YouTube, it's really amazing how cool they can look,
the end robot. I think one disadvantage of this is that it's quite expensive. So one of these blocks
is about 50 euros or maybe 45 dollars 50 dollars so if you want to build big robots and have lots
of options then you need to invest quite a bit of money yeah i like that the website says free
shipping on orders over 50 it's like okay pretty much anything it sounds like yeah yeah i guess
but i still i still i love it because it makes you like be creative and um especially having this
that you can program them later on using Mako.
That's one of the visual programming language.
I think that's the run from Microsoft.
You can keep using them over a long period of time.
Yeah, for maybe a mental model for people who haven't seen these in action,
because even looking at the website, you'd have to know,
like, what do I do with these things again?
Why are they here?
I feel like they should have maybe a little animation or something.
But there's these cubes, as the name would imply,
but they're almost like LEGO blocks
that each block is programmable.
And then you combine them into a thing that does stuff, right?
Yeah.
I think you explained it well.
Yeah, thanks.
So I think that that's pretty interesting.
But this is probably in the next stage, right?
The next stage would be maybe 6 to 9.
What do you think?
Yeah.
So yeah, exactly.
I think the next stage regarding development
would be around 6 to 9.
course you also always have to mention it's this is now for normally developing children it's just
an average every child is different so if you observe your child you know which skills develop
at what point and what might be easier for them what is harder so this is not like hard ranges
um but yeah if you start with about six years of age um you can start using visual programming tools
because kids become more used to using technology.
They have a better hand-eye coordination.
And also one very important part of the brain, the prefrontal cortex,
it's like the CEO of our brain, has a big growth spurt between five and eight.
And this improves working memory, planning, attention,
all kinds of mechanisms that you need to start really sitting down and code.
So yeah, you already opened Scratch Junior.
yeah and scratch junior is um i think scratch is quite popular one of the most popular um visual
coding languages and scratch junior is just a simplified version of it for very young children
starting at five to seven it's recommended on their website um so it has no text but rather
actions like movement and in visual programming in general you have puzzle pieces um to represent
concepts like loops usually or i don't know variables logical expressions and you can plug
them together so you don't have to worry about syntax or using the command line you just create
these um programs by putting together puzzle pieces so that's um and that happens on a visual
interface. So that's what visual programming is about. And Scratch Junior is just a very
simple version. I think it's just a free app. You can play on a tablet and create little programs
where the characters move around and do things. Yeah. Kind of like the bee, but you more,
a little closer to real programming, but then you see the output, right?
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And you start really using, I guess, these plug in principles that you have the blocks that you put together. So when you go on to, for example, scratch or another of the visual programming languages, you're already, you have knowledge about how it works in general, I guess.
Yeah. As I look at this website, I was thinking, you know, when I think about coding, I think about computers, right? Mac, Windows, whatever, with apps. But obviously, young kids are way more in tune with touch devices like iPads and Android tablets and stuff, right?
It's amazing how quickly they adapt and learn it.
I think it's quite...
Sometimes I'm blown away by how young children can already understand
how to swipe and select stuff on a touch screen.
Yeah.
I think actually it probably lowers the age by quite a bit
that kids are able to do this kind of stuff
because these touch interfaces exist in decent ways.
Yeah, absolutely.
Just learning how to type is actually one of the main reasons
why you can only start with textual programming later because typing is hard. You need to learn
how to do it. And yeah, just touching and dragging and dropping is much easier.
When my older kids were very young, we wanted to have them work with
things like this and just learn how to use computers. And this predated the iPhone. It
want to use. And so we got like, kind of like you get a typing program to learn to touch type.
We got a mousing program and there was like a little airplane and they had to like chase the
airplane around with the mouse to learn how the eye hand coordination of mouse and then like screen,
right? When you're three or four years old, like that's not natural, right? But touching,
they already be all over that. Yeah. I think sometimes it's even too intuitive for them.
Yeah, that's the problem.
It starts having a very huge influence on them way too early,
but I guess that's a different discussion.
Yeah, that's a different problem.
That sends you back to a robot turtle board game.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, okay.
So a little bit later, we could do,
once you start doing this, some kind of programming language,
then that opens up a bunch of resources, right?
So obviously Scratch is sort of the way more full featured version of Scratch Junior, right?
That's pretty neat.
Yeah, I think Scratch is amazing because I think for kids, it's great.
I know lots of adults that still use it for some projects where you really want to make it come alive
because Scratch is focused on having really cool, interactive, fun projects.
They have sounds, music, you can add graphics, and it's just offers a lot of functionality to create your project, share them with friends.
Yeah.
And there is a ton of resources on learning Scratch.
And as you can see here, like make music, create a story, create a character.
I guess your possibilities are endless.
Yeah, it looks really, actually, I didn't realize all the stuff they got going here.
They have a bunch of tutorials, free coding community, super cool.
Then I guess just while we're talking on these visual programming languages, we could talk about Blockly, right?
Yeah, when I, like I knew Blockly existed, it is also free, like Scratch is also free.
I guess that's important to mention.
And Blockly is actually at the basis of most of the other visual languages.
For example, it is actually like block-based languages like Scratch and MakeCode are based on Blockly.
Blockly is developed by Google.
And with Blockly, I think it's for a bit older kids because it's more low level.
If you can say that, it offers you more flexibility.
You see the code next to the blocks.
You see it in an editor, how it actually looks like.
And you could copy-paste the code into a normal editor and run it.
so
yeah it's more
low level but also
somewhat more sophisticated
the editor that you
have it more it looks more like coding
to me than scratch
I think
maybe the way to think about it
you said it's more low level I would say
each block almost
corresponds to a single
symbol
of code
almost right like
you have a set variable too.
Then you put another block on, which is the value.
And then you've got your visual editor,
but then side by side you have your JavaScript.
Or I imagine you could probably see Python
or other languages if there's a dropdown
for choosing the output language.
But yeah, it's...
You can use JavaScript, Python, PHP, Lua, or Dart.
Interesting.
Okay, yeah, so that's kind of getting
a little farther up there.
And maybe we could talk a bit about the hardware side,
because that's one way that it actually can be something you can touch and feel
as you interact with these ideas, right?
Yeah.
I know that that's nothing I ever used, but my brother started using it.
Like, I know that he bought a Raspberry Pi.
You open now the micro bit, which is like a smaller programmable device.
and the Raspberry Pi would be like full-fledged computer
in a tiny device.
But yeah, you can learn a lot about hardware
and also coding by having such devices.
And the micro:bit has displays, buttons, sensors,
and you can program it using MakeCode,
one of the other visual programming languages.
And I think it's quite cheap compared to other devices.
Like a Raspberry Pi is,
I think it's not expensive for having all these abilities
or these capabilities,
but the micro:bit is, I guess, more affordable
for lots of people.
Oh yeah, nice.
You can see how it works.
- Oh, and you know what's really interesting is
if you go to makecode.micro:bit.org,
even if you don't have one of these devices,
it comes with a little emulator
And then it has a virtual micro bit that you can write code against.
And it gives you an option as well to choose Python or Blockly or some other way of working
with it, which is pretty cool.
Yeah, exactly.
That's also why it's recommended for like officially it's recommended for children at
the age of eight or older.
And Blockly, I think is even recommended for kids starting at 10.
Okay.
Yeah.
Whereas Scratch is for even younger children, right?
They say you can get started at eight.
And they say what I think, which is funny, they say it's up to 16, which doesn't make
sense to me.
Why would there be an upper limit?
But yeah.
Anyway, you can still use it.
Sorry, you're 17.
You have to do C++ now.
Yes, exactly.
Also, I think what is great about visual programming is that you can always come back to it.
It's not that you progress from these robots to visual programming to textual programming.
but you can use visual programming for doing, I don't know, digital stories, and you can still do
textural programming at work. Yeah, it's just having all these options now is really nice.
Yeah, absolutely. Let's see. We also have Zumi. Zumi is pretty cool. Let's come back to Zumi. I do
want to talk about something that's a little bit more real similar to the micro bit first is
many of the things over at Adafruit.
Are you a fan of Adafruit?
I don't know Adafruit. Tell me about it.
So this is a company
that creates a whole bunch of small devices
like the BBC Microbit
that run CircuitPython.
So there's just tons and tons of
things you can buy.
You can buy little sensors
and you can buy little e-ink displays
or whatever it is that you're looking for.
And there's just many, many little ways
to make these projects a little bit more than a micro bit.
So for example, you could get one of these ESP32 devices,
but it has like a little tiny display on it
that you can output your text to.
And it costs $19.
You know what I mean?
which is pretty ridiculous.
And they often come with tutorials on how to do it.
So this is, if you're into this kind of stuff,
this is like a perfect place to go look.
Yeah.
Also, there's just so much opportunity to learn,
even for like being the parent.
I would learn so much from doing this.
It would be so valuable to me to learn more about the hardware side of things,
especially because you, I would never sit down and buy myself a Raspberry Pi.
I don't know why, but I wouldn't do it.
Just don't find the time.
You already have a computer and all that.
Yeah.
And if I can do it together with my children, I think that's just amazing.
It's really cool.
And this is just a general thing about learning with kids.
If you learn together with them, they can also be the expert sometimes,
which is amazing for kids.
If they can explain something to you that they understand better,
It gives them so much joy and helps them develop this passion and love for learning.
I think that's a great thing about learning how to code.
That it doesn't matter if you are the best coder, but you can just use it as a way to improve yourself.
Yeah, and once they get that mastery, they're like, oh, now I've gone beyond them.
It's probably a really good feeling.
If my kids want to learn how to code early, much earlier than myself, they will become so much better than me so quickly.
Yeah.
Yeah, for sure.
I have one of these little devices here.
You put it in your hand.
It's certainly smaller than the palm of my hand.
And this thing manages the DNS and ad blocking on my network.
It was like 20 bucks or something.
Yeah.
So there's sort of less playful, more interesting, also just, you know,
utilitarian things you can do with these little things.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
All right.
Back to Zoomy, which is in the same age category, I would say.
This is like around 10 years or so.
Yeah.
But it's more robot-like, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Like, it's a self-driving car kit.
Like, it's a small car.
And it has so many capabilities.
you can program it using Python and Blockly.
And it can, yeah, like you can even teach it
about driving certain ways by providing your own data sets.
So there is a lot of machine learning,
even you can teach it.
It offers so many capabilities
or opportunities or ways to create projects.
At my company, we have done quite a few workshops
with kids with Zumi and they love doing it.
And the adults love doing it too.
Nice. It's like a self-driving car kit. So if you wanted to try to, instead of maybe
teaching it, you go forward three steps, you turn right, you go forward two steps,
you turn left, you teach it. If you see a turn left sign, you turn left or something like that,
right? Yes, exactly. Yeah. It can really understand or analyze its environment.
Yeah, that's pretty awesome.
Okay.
And you do events with these?
Yes.
Yeah.
That's also maybe advice for people that want to get started.
It's always useful to check out local events that happen at companies that are close to where you live or universities.
They do offer a lot of free, often offer free workshops for kids where you can sign them up to learn about robotics or coding.
And it can be like an easy way to get them started if you find it hard to do it yourself.
Yeah, I think a lot, at least in the US, there's quite a few programs for like summer teen programs that do like either 3D printing or, you know, coding with Lego robots or whatever.
So there's a lot of summer camps and that type of things.
Yeah, I guess that's very big in the US.
And Germany, I think not so much, maybe it's growing, but, yeah, you can, definitely
spend a lot of time, doing it.
I know that like we at our company, we sometimes offer day workshops, where you
can just start getting to know about a topic or just play around with things, becoming,
um, kids interested in the topic in the first place.
Yeah.
That's really neat.
Last in the category of hardware here, you already mentioned it though, is a Raspberry
Pi, which I guess is a little closer to just a real computer, right?
Yeah.
It's a really powerful device.
So it's basically a very small and cheap computer that runs Linux.
But you can use it to learn coding, but you can also build hardware projects with it,
do home automation, learn about the internet of things.
But it's recommended for kids starting at 11 years, so quite a bit older because you need programming.
And this maybe also shifts over to the next age range, namely when your kids have typing skills and also a more well-developed cognitive abilities.
The prefrontal cortex, which I talked about, the CEO of the brain, the development starts to mature and stabilize.
So planning, organizing, thinking abstractly, all these skills become more fully developed.
And you, of course, need the typing skills to get started with textual coding.
So at the age nine plus, most of the time, you can get started with these things.
For example, with like programming Raspberry Pi or just more traditional textual programming languages.
Yeah.
The typing skills is pretty interesting, I think.
You know, one that I know you've talked about before,
but I think is also super interesting as a gateway to this.
This is the best one that I know.
Maybe people know of others as well, is Code Combat.
You did a podcast episode on it years ago, right?
This is one of the ones, like my daughter and I both subscribed to this for a while,
when she was younger.
And we'd go through and we did, I don't know, like,
I can't remember, I think she did 30 or 40 code challenges
through there or something like that, which was pretty awesome.
And I also had the guys on the show, yeah.
It's been a little while.
Yeah, it has been.
But it's still, I think it's an amazing resource.
So Code Combat is about learning how to code through gaming.
So you play a game from beginning to end.
And while you play the game, you learn to code in Python
or javascript i think there are several languages but you really do textual programming and if your
kid likes gaming or this is something that makes it easier for them to get started with coding it's
an amazing resource even though you have to pay for it because you're really guided through the
course you can have lessons and you can even have i think teacher lessons once or twice a week
dependent on your subscription plan yeah um i think there might be a yeah i think there might
be a free tier if you tell it you're a student but you can only do certain challenges like for
example see this there's like a locks here and it says i think yeah i have to subscribe to this if
i want to do all if i want to solve all the puzzles but there's some of them you can do for free i
believe i don't feel like we had to pay at the beginning but they could have changed the model
i also played around with it um at least in the beginning you can try it out for free yeah what i
really like about this you know so if you click on if you go to this you click on the things it says
for this challenge you're going to learn arguments and syntax or if you come over here and you click
on this one it'll say you'll learn while loops or whatever but then it gives you just a a nice simple
challenge so it but what's cool oh no in order to play that one i got to can i play this one
yeah here you go so you have this character and what's oh my gosh it made that very large um
what's really cool though is when you it gives you a little hint but the editor here's here's what i
think is special about co-combat the editor is auto complete like you have never seen you know
what i mean so it says all right what you need to do is build a fence and you have a hero and the
the hero has the ability to say build at X, Y position,
or it could move.
And if I just type the letter D,
it'll auto-complete like hero.moveDown.
Or if I say hero.build.xy,
it automatically puts in all the...
So if you can type just a couple of characters,
it'll keep the spacing for indentation and block definitions.
And all of that kind of stuff is ridiculous
for how you don't even have to really have the right syntax.
You just have to put a little bit of some kind of word in there at all,
and it'll start to write all of it for you,
which I think that's the magic here.
It's nice that you have this insider knowledge
by having tried it out yourself for quite a while.
Yeah, it worked way better than other stuff
when my daughter was young,
I was trying to teach her like beyond the visual programming things, but it's, it's so forgiving
compared to, well, here's your favorite editor and you start typing. Oh, why won't it run? There's
three spaces, not four. Oh, I see. you know, all that kind of detail you got to normally deal
with. Yeah. It can be so frustrating in the beginning if you need to learn about everything
at the same time, like syntax, spacing brackets. it's just a lot to learn in the beginning.
if you just want to understand the basic concept like for a start yeah absolutely another thing
you put out there was uh code club yeah that's i think a really cool resource by the raspberry pi
foundation so it's a platform and um it guides your kids from lesson to lesson so you start
with learning scratch but then it progresses onto python and um yeah you can start i think at the
age of eight yeah you can start at the age of eight which is also the recommended age for um scratch
and this is just an example for a full platform that you can use to guide yourself or your
children through progressing from one thing to the other and i think it's also free so if you
start looking, there are lots of online coding classes that you can use that teach you different
things and have a whole program and sets of ideas behind how to approach different topics.
Yeah, this looks very fun. And the example at least they have on the screen is using
Blockly, right? Or Scratch, one of them. I think it's Scratch. Yeah. I think level one is Scratch
and then level two would be Python and more comes after that.
Yeah, that's really cool.
Another one in this realm is Hedi.
I had not heard of Hedi.
Yeah, me neither.
Just when I started researching the topic,
why I chose it as an example
is that I just like the concept of gradual programming.
So gradual programming means that
what I just mentioned, basically,
that if you learn language speaking or like a programming language, you have to learn a lot
at the same time. It can be overwhelming. You have concepts like loops, if else, and syntax like
quotation marks, round brackets. And in Hedi, it's free, like it's a web-based interface. And
concepts are introduced with as little syntax and then refined. So in the beginning, you can just
just type print and the text and you don't have to worry about quotation marks or brackets.
It's just introduced at a later stage.
So it mimics the way in which we would learn a language.
And in the end, you like it's based on Python.
So you learn a subset of Python, not the entire programming language, but it's syntactically
valid and you have all the right syntax.
But for some kids, it might be easier to get started with having not everything like being
what you have to quote yourself right like learning oh whoops you forgot to close the parentheses so
it's not going to run or you forgot to close the quote so it won't work something like that
yeah exactly yeah kids run into that all all the time because they're like well i see the words
on the screen that i wanted to do but no no you got to put it in quotes and why
oh and maybe regarding the age this is recommended for age 10 plus years so
yeah when you want to get started with actual textual programming so it fits into the third
age range that we discussed excellent okay and yeah that's pretty much the last
limited age range i guess you would say before just just go and do regular programming right
exactly from there you can just progress on to more traditional programming languages
There are lots of resources like from the Bersbury Pi Foundation.
They have Python courses and there are some on Udemy.
If you start looking, there are tons of resources to get started.
There are lots of online and on-site classes that teach kids starting at various ages.
Yeah, I know about a few German offers where you can really find what you're interested in,
which is really important, like make coding fun
and learning fun for kids.
So find out what they are interested in,
what their passion is,
and then find something that fits their interest.
- I'm sure there's a ton of stuff on YouTube
as well to help people, but at least I'm out of touch.
I bet there's a lot on TikTok actually.
- Oh yeah, I'm out of touch with that as well.
Just, you know, you learn one concept every 30 seconds.
You just swipe away until you're a programmer.
I should actually look at that probably when talking about coding with kids.
I guess that's something that would or can play a big part.
Yeah, yeah, for sure.
Instagram Reels or whatever.
All right.
I think that kind of touches on most of the resources that we have out there.
There's one more I do want to talk about, though.
and I think this is probably as good around it's it's beyond the code combat stage where
where kids can actually use a an editor to create proper valid syntax but it's not much beyond that
and that's anvil at anvil that works are you familiar with anvil no so I've had uh Meredith
the creator of this online and what on the show but what's really interesting is it's a way to
visually build web pages that are actual real web pages that people can actually you know you publish
it your family or your friends could use it so if you wanted to build you know something like a
harry potter type thing and you could have your friends vote on which one which character is their
favorite or and why or whatever you know like you could build this into a web page and publish it
And with so many of these projects, it's like, okay, I built this cool thing.
How do I share it?
Or how do I make it look like the thing that I use?
And so you can do this drag and drop, build it out thing.
But then you write the front end interactive code in Python, in true Python, not JavaScript.
And then it has kind of like a simplified database in the backend.
So it has like a little bit of like persistence and storage.
But it's really cool.
After we did Code Combat with my daughter,
we went and we did this.
And she built a bunch of things that were really--
she really thought were pretty neat.
She could share with people and have people input little text
messages or whatever.
And so--
I love that.
Yeah.
Again, I have very little knowledge about web programming.
So this would be a good tool for me to get started as well.
Yeah, well, also the problem is, even if you're a very good web programmer, it's like, okay, kid, you go from code combat to now you're doing CSS, HTML, database, you know, like the explosion of complexity to puts and then you do all that and then how do you even put it on the web?
It's just so out of control, that step from one to the next.
And so if people want to do anything with like web pages and Python, this is a really cool option, I think, right here.
Pretty cool. Yeah. And like speaking from your experience, how did you get your kids excited
about coding? Did they just like it or do they hate it?
They were, that's a good question. So my older daughters, they grew up with less technology
because they're older. So at first they weren't super into it, but then they got into college
and they had to start learning things for their degree.
And so now one of my daughters is doing a lot with R,
which is fine because she's in psychology
and that's what all of her colleagues are using.
Which is fine.
It's not ideal, but it's fine.
It's not ideal.
It's fine, no.
I'm not that distant.
No, I'm very proud of her.
So I think that's,
I think there's different things that can motivate you.
You know, you can just be curious.
Like my youngest daughter's like,
let's play games.
Let's play code combat.
Then she's like, I want to build something for my friend.
And so we did this thing with Anvil.
And she was very motivated to seek out the technology and play with it.
Whereas my older daughters, I think they weren't that interested.
They had other things to do.
But once they got somewhere with a job or with their education where they needed it,
then all of a sudden it was more interesting.
So it varies by kid, I think.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I guess that's fine as well.
not everyone needs to like coding, but just having the opportunity to learn about it and experience
yourself if it's something that you're actually like, I was just so blown away when I experienced
how fun it is to learn how to code. I always thought it was boring and having all these
stereotypes in my head because I never actually knew anyone that was coding. So yeah, it's nice
that they had the opportunity to learn about it at home.
Yeah, it absolutely is.
So I think we have a little more follow-up here
on the TikTok learning style.
Ty Vastouther says,
you can learn every single short,
but you won't remember anything as you flip through them.
Flip, flip, flip, which is probably true.
And then also, Krishan asks,
do you think Scratch is good to start with for kids?
Like if you had a kid who was 10, 11, 12, 13,
what would you start them with?
Yeah, I would get started with visual programming.
I think it makes it easier.
I know that for some kids,
it can be hard then to progress onto textual programming.
But I guess this is just a general thing.
You need to see what works.
It's not that you,
it might be that you start with one thing
and you see, actually, it doesn't work for us.
And then you have to switch tracks.
And that will happen a lot.
And that's just fine.
You need to find your own path through it.
And don't be afraid to actually make changes
if you are not enjoying what,
or your kid is not enjoying their work.
But I think visual programming is a great and fun way
to get started with coding concepts
and not have it feel like you're actually coding.
Yeah, absolutely.
So Christian's child is 13.
I would consider code combat, actually.
I think 13, you're well enough to do textual stuff
if it's not too much drudgery, right?
Like matching braces and quotes and all that.
So maybe if this kind of thing inspires, maybe that as well.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think 13 is great for getting started with textual programming as well.
And it was so nice about having large language models now is that lots of these offers are being translated to various languages.
And it is becoming much more easy to get started in your native language, which might not be English.
And then you do not have to learn a language while you learn how to code.
Yeah, that's also, I think, a huge advantage of the current time.
Yeah, that's something that's always been interesting to me is so many of the programming languages are in English.
But many of the programmers, their first language is not English.
And, you know, maybe like your English is perfect, I'm sure.
You know, forward, while is no big deal.
But when you're 10 years old, you know, here you need to learn a program.
Well, by the way, it's in a foreign language.
That's just that's pretty wild, right?
That's got to be challenging.
What was your, like, how do you feel about this?
I mean, you're more in it than I am.
Yeah, I would always start, like, if you have the chance,
then start in the native language of the child,
and you will definitely find good ways to get started and good offers.
For example, Scratch, I think, is available in lots of languages,
70 languages, actually.
So, yeah, choose something that keeps the cognitive effort
that you need to get started with.
simpler because otherwise you really have to learn two things at the same time,
learning a language and learning all these concepts.
And it can then be overwhelming.
Yeah.
It's not something that I had to deal with, but looking back, I'm like, wow,
I was pretty lucky that I didn't have to learn what all the keywords meant in
addition to just what I was trying to do.
Yeah, absolutely.
That's also actually why I decided to study in English because I knew
all the papers I'm reading are in English,
all the code I'm writing is in English.
It doesn't make sense to study it in German.
It's just weird.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
The internet has done some interesting things
to just sort of spread everything around globally.
So, all right.
And Alina, this has been awesome.
A bunch of concrete things for people to take
and work with their kids,
maybe if they're grandparents, their grandchildren,
or if they're teachers or friends, kids or whatever, right?
How about some, yeah, how about some final advice to close out the topic?
Yeah, I think for me, two things are the most important ones.
Namely, first, don't force your child to learn how to code,
but see if you can find a way that makes it fun for them.
I think making or learning that learning is actually a cool thing.
is like it offers you or it opens you so many doors in your life that you learn that putting
in the effort and even if something is complicated um is worth it it's just one of the most valuable
skills you can provide your child with so yeah learning how to learn and how to love learning
I guess and there's lots of ways in which you can do it and choose the right topics be patient
sit down with your kids and learn together don't force them to sit down for long times and
like rather distribute learning sessions over time don't be afraid to switch tracks I think
lots of the things that apply to adults also apply to children regarding learning
absolutely
very good advice
I would just maybe
reemphasize that
people should reward persistence
yeah
reward it very very highly
I can't believe you spent half an hour
and you just barely got it to print hello
but that's actually a massive accomplishment
I'm so proud of how hard you
focused and worked on it
that's a big deal
that makes a huge difference
to kids
yeah probably adults as well and also but you lay the foundation for yeah
absolutely yeah yeah I mean that that expands on to being good at literature
or being good at philosophy or like whatever it is you that's hard to learn
leaving that you can learn anything yes exactly and the other is to try to
capture inspiration if they're like really really excited and they really
want to learn a thing at that moment, then you could introduce some of these tools. But if they're
like, I want to go outside and play with my friends, you're like, no, come in, we're doing coding. Like,
maybe that's not, not the moment. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. All right. Thank you for taking the time to
put this all together and coming on the show and nice to have you back. So yeah, thank you. Yeah.
Thanks. Bye. Bye.
Bye.